# HW12

```c
static void *prev_mapped = NULL;

static void
handle_sigsegv(int sig, siginfo_t *si, void *ctx) {
    // Your code here.
    printf("Handler called\n");
    uintptr_t fault_addr = (uintptr_t)si->si_addr;
    uintptr_t aligned = align_down(fault_addr, page_size);
    uintptr_t start_index = (aligned - (uintptr_t)sqrts) / sizeof(double);
    void *mapped;

    if (prev_mapped && munmap(prev_mapped, page_size) < 0) {
        printf("munmap fails\n");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    if ((mapped = mmap((void *)aligned, page_size, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, 
                       MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0)) < 0) {
        printf("mmap fails\n");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    prev_mapped = mapped;
    calculate_sqrts(mapped, start_index, page_size / sizeof(double));
}
```

The implementation is itself is not hard. But it's not easy to understand the logic of the code.



## man pages

For `struct rlimit`, read `man setrlimit`. `Struct rlimit` sets the memory limit of the process.

For `sigaction`, read `man sigaction`. Make sure you know the difference between `sa_handler` field and `sa_sigaction` field of `struct sigaction`.

Also, read `man mmap` and `man munmap`.



## code logic

In `setup_sqrt_region`, the first call to `mmap` has `NULL` as the first argument, so the physical memory is allocated and mapped at an address chosen by the library, as the return value. The address is assigned to `sqrt`. The second call to `mmap` unmaps those allocated memory. So we see the first call to `mmap` is to find a suitable location for the `sqrt` table. Then `handle_sigsegv` is registered as a signal handler for `SIGSEGV`, segmentation fault. From this point, invalide memory access would cause `handle_sigsegv` to be called, with relevant information in the argument.

> Modify the code in `handle_sigsegv()` to map in a page at the faulting address, unmap a previous page to stay within the physical memory limit, and initialize the new page with the correct square root values.

In `handle_sigsegv`, we get the faulting address, allocate a new page at that address, and use `calculate_sqrts` to fill the values at that address. However, we also need to unmap the previously unmapped page. Why? The total number of pages allowed in the address space is `AS_LIMIT / page_size = 8192`, but the largest possible number of pages for the table is `MAX_SQRTS * sizeof(double) / page_size = 262144`. That's the reason why we unmap `prev_mapped` every time before mapping a new page.

Another point worth of noticing is the behavior of `test_sqrt_region`. If you add some `printf` statement, you would find that the signal handler is called not at `calculate_sqrt(&correct_sqrt, pos, 1`), but at `sqrt[pos] != correst_sqrt`. The reason is that `double correct_sqrt` allocates memory for a double on the stack and `calculate_sqrt` only accesses the memory for one double. So accessing `&correct` is allowed and the segment fault happens when trying to access `sqrts[pos`], which is not mapped yet.