# HW11

## Creating a Problem

```
> rm fs.img; make qemu
$ echo hi > a
lapicid 0: panic: commit mimicking crash
 80102e2e 80105166 80104969 80105995 801057ac 0 0 0 0 0
> make qemu-nox
qemu-system-i386 -nographic -drive file=fs.img,index=1,media=disk,format=raw -drive file=xv6.img,index=0,media=disk,format=raw -smp 1 -m 512 
xv6...
cpu0: starting 0
sb: size 20000 nblocks 19937 ninodes 200 nlog 30 logstart 2 inodestart 32 bmap start 58
recovery: n=2 but ignoring
init: starting sh
$ cat a
lapicid 0: panic: ilock: no type
 80101807 80105118 80104969 80105995 801057ac 0 0 0 0 0
```

>  Make sure you understand what happened. Which of the file creation's modifications were written to the disk before the crash, and which were not?

The first panic happens when the shell, `pid = 2`, tries to execute create the file and executes `commit`. As mentioned in the HW spec, `BBB` line changes the first block in the log to be written to block zero. At file creation, the first block in the log is the new file's inode updated to have non-zero type. 

After restart xv6, the `recover_from_log` does nothing. Then shell tries to execute `cat a`. `Sys_read` calls `fileread`, which calls `ilock`. `Ilock` panics as it finds the inode has `type = 0`.



## Solving the Problem

After fixing `recover_from_log`.

```
> make qemu-nox
...
recovery: n=2
init: starting sh
$ cat a
$ 
```

> This time there should be no crash. Make sure you understand why the file system now works.

Let's re-examine the whole process of logging. 

- After modifying the data of a cache of  a block, `bp->data`, `log_write` is called to record this information in memory: `log.lh.block[i]` is updated and `bp->flags` is marked `B_DIRTY`.
- `write_log` copies the modified block from cache to log. The logs contains the exactly the content we want to write to the disk. `write_log` copies the content from the in-memory cache to on-disk log block.

- After `write_log` completes the on-disk log, we write the in-memory log header to the disk. This commits the transaction.
- Then we call `install_trans` to copy data from log blocks to data blocks. Note that `install_trans` uses the in-memory copy of `log.lh`. Then we update in-memory log header `log.lh.n = 0` and calls `write_head` to write it to the disk.

Call graph for `echo hi > a`:

```
runcmd
  open
  sys_open
    create
    end_op
```

When creating file `a`, before writing to it, `end_op` is called, which calls `commit`. After `write_log` and `write_head`, `commit` changes `log.lh.block[0] = 0` and so `install_trans` doesn't update the on-disk inode correctly. When xv6 restarts, `recovery_from_log` doesn't help and `ilock` panic. Note that the correct logs and header for creating file `a` are written to the disk. However, no log about writing the content to `a` has been written.

After fixing `recover_from_log`, when booting, xv6 reads the correct header from the disk and performs the transaction. So `a` is correctly created. Then `cat a` executes, but `a` is an empty file.



## Streamlining Commit

> Make sure you understand why it would be a mistake for the buffer cache to evict block 33 from the buffer cache before the commit.

If the buffer cache is evicted, the modification is lost. If `install_trans` calls `bread` to read it again from the disk, the modification is lost. However, this never happens since when `bget` tries to replace an existing buffer cache, it never evicts a modified uncommitted change, with `B_DIRTY` set.

With the discussion above, the implementaion is easy. Modify `def.h` and change `install_trans` to:

```c
static void
install_trans(void)
{
  int tail;

  for (tail = 0; tail < log.lh.n; tail++) {
    // struct buf *lbuf = bread(log.dev, log.start+tail+1); // read log block
    struct buf *lbuf = bget(log.dev, log.start+tail+1);

    struct buf *dbuf = bread(log.dev, log.lh.block[tail]); // read dst
    memmove(dbuf->data, lbuf->data, BSIZE);  // copy block to dst
    bwrite(dbuf);  // write dst to disk
    brelse(lbuf);
    brelse(dbuf);
  }
}
```

However, we can do a little better:

```c
// Copy committed blocks from log to their home location
static void
install_trans(void)
{
  int tail;

  for (tail = 0; tail < log.lh.n; tail++) {
    // struct buf *lbuf = bread(log.dev, log.start+tail+1); // read log block
    struct buf *dbuf = bread(log.dev, log.lh.block[tail]); // read dst
    // memmove(dbuf->data, lbuf->data, BSIZE);  // copy block to dst
    bwrite(dbuf);  // write dst to disk
    // brelse(lbuf);
    brelse(dbuf);
  }
}
```

Just commenting `bread` is enough and we don't need to call `bget` by outself. `bread` already calls `bget` to read from the buffer cache. With this method, we don't need to modify the header file. Recall that `log_write` sets `log.lh.block[tail]` correctly.